Today it’s a great day for us, for all
the Sahaja Yogis, that on this day I would
say, we are late by one day, or two days,
the Sahastrara was opened out. It was just
a miracle, I should say, because I did not
think that I am at a point where it could
be done. So, I wanted to wait, but some things
happened that made Me think that it has to
be opened. It was
in such a situation that I felt that if I
delayed anymore now, it may help these false
gurus to spread their nonsense all over. This
just is, I should say, a Sahaj way of doing
things.
Now, 25 years have passed, you have all gathered
here during this time, and we have so many
others who are not here, who have achieved
so many things. But perhaps we are not aware
as to what we have achieved, in the real sense
of the word. You’ve got your vibrations,
you can feel this all-pervading power, you
are, as they say, swimming in the Ocean of
Joy, you are all enjoying the collectivity,
and that you have transcended many of your
limitations. All this has happened to you
because it is your right to have it. I don’t
take any credit for it, only thing, all the
time I have been pointing it out to you, one
thing, that now, you have entered into the
Kingdom of God, and enjoy yourself.
We have to see around ourselves the whole
nature enjoys itself, it doesn’t bother,
doesn’t bother about anything. They haven’t
got Realisation, they haven’t felt the Paramchaitanya,
but how is it they know that we have to enjoy?
The flowers that come out for a short time
and fade out – but as long as they live
they are very happy. They don’t think of
their past or of their future; but they enjoy
the present – and in the present they enjoy
– what is that – they are fragrant and
giving fragrance to others. They are beautiful
and they are soothing others, the whole nature
is like that. If you look at the birds, or
anything that we call as natural, is all sort
of in a meditative mood, all these hills and
big, big mountains. They look as if they are
witness to whatever has been happening.
Now, we have to really first look back what
we have achieved. That is important, because
if you are climbing up on a hill, if you look
back, you get a shock, and you may fall down.
So, normally people say never look back. But,
a person who has earned some treasure, he
again and again goes and counts it and finds
out how much he has got, and every time he
sees that he enjoys. So, to know relatively
what we have got, and how we have achieved
something, will definitely give you greater
strength of mind and richness of life.
The first thing that has happened to you,
I would say, which is very important, is this:
that you have felt this all-pervading power.
That shows that you must have been great seekers
of Truth, honest, sincere, sensible, that
just coming to My programme you felt the vibrations,
and after that you started settling down into
it. So many of you have felt it, suddenly,
and they were amazed, and they were shocked
and surprised, and they wanted to test whether
it is true or not. But then you were confident,
you found it, that you’ve got definitely
a new dimension in your life, and that you
are feeling this all-pervading power of Divine
Love. I’ll take one lecture, sufficient
to describe this all-pervading power.
But what you’ve got out of it is the essence
of it, one has to know, is a complete freedom,
you have achieved your complete freedom. First
of all, the freedom has come to you; first
of all, most important – is from your Ego,
this wall of Ego you have crossed. You have
got out of the bondage of this Ego, which
was really so much, full of problems for you.
So many things this Ego does of which you
are not aware. Firstly, a person who is an
egoist doesn’t mind hurting anyone. He hurts,
but if he’s hurt he doesn’t like it, immediately
he’ll start crying. Especially, I have seen
people who have too much Ego are very easily
hurt, but they don’t understand how many
people they have hurt already, and how many
are really frightened of such a person.
So, you got rid of your Ego. It is sinful
to hurt any other human being, for anything,
for whatever may be the reason, that you feel
you should hurt another one. The first is
the revenge, the idea of revenge is there,
that I must take a revenge on the person who
has hurt me, or has done some wrong to me,
or something of that kind. This idea of revenge
comes when you react. Some people react very
violently. I have seen some people murdering
each other in the name of revenge, killing
their own kith and kin, killing their fellow
men, their countrymen. All over the world
is some sort of a stupid idea of revenge;
but if you go to the subtle side of revenge,
what is it? What revenge have you taken? Supposing
there is somebody who has troubled you, you
are angry with that person, and you have killed
that person; so you have actually saved him!
He won’t have to suffer from guilty conscience,
he won’t have to do anything, he’s just
finished. What is the revenge is? The revenge
should be only by which a person gets out
of his idea of killing others. Like a sword
never fights a sword, it fights the shield.
In the same way, the revenge that we think
we can take on another person is not a revenge,
because any action you take in the name of
revenge comes back to you and hurts you much
more. So many things can happen if a person,
in the name of revenge, starts acting.
Now, for example, these days, you know, in
the whole world there’s so much of revenge
going on. Even in the name of God, taking
revenge because certain people are following
some religion, or they are doing something
else that you aren’t doing. Working out
this kind of a revenge – what is happening
is that you are just killing people, destroying
them, who do not even understand what sort
of a revenge you are taking. People are putting
bombs and putting all kinds of things, and
by that thousands of innocent people, one
is killing. So what kind of a revenge have
you taken? They don’t deserve any revenge.
So this revenge, when it explodes, can destroy
so many innocent people, and it will definitely
react on you. You cannot get away with it,
it’s a very long process of this revenge.
I have told you about Bermuda Triangle, what
they say, that so many blacks were taken slaves
and were drowned in that area, so their spirits,
they are saying, are haunting on the people
who are passing by, mostly the whites, and
they just drowned them. So it’s a very long
process, and all that I need not discuss at
this auspicious occasion, but I have to say
that when we take a revenge, every action
has a reaction. So somehow you have got out
of that idea of revenge – just out of that
idea.
There is another thing, that if you don’t
take revenge, and leave it to God, it acts.
It acts, not only that, but the Divine power
takes into its own control how to really give
a good lesson to that person, or to that community,
or to that kind of organisation which is taking
a revenge on you. You don’t have to worry.
I’ll have to tell you that in these 25 years
I have seen, people have been extremely unkind
to me. Many organisations, many so-called
“religions”, all kinds of things, have
been after us, media has been after us. Take
the example of French media, they tried to
trouble us so much, and tried to bring a bad
name to us, doesn’t matter. The media people,
now three of them who went to India, are now
under warrant, and if they go to India they
will be arrested. I didn’t do anything,
we didn’t do anything. Secondly, the same
media, I mean the same newspapers, are all
bankrupt. You didn’t do anything about it,
you didn’t go and say that they should become
bankrupt, you didn’t take any revenge. Why
should we? Why should we take any revenge?
Because we are not bothered as to what happens,
we are not bothered as to what these people
have done to us. But legally they are now
involved in such a way that they are under
warrant, and if they go to India, they will
be arrested, and the whole of French government
is with them, all of them are trying so much,
but this punishment is on their head. In their
lifetime – they didn’t have to die or
anything – in their lifetime they have got
it.
So you have got this special power that you
do not have to take revenge, or you have to
just forgive, just forgive, and the forgiveness
will look after the whole arrangement of how
to bring the other person to his proper path.
So, once you are out of this idea of revenge,
you really feel very peaceful, extremely peaceful.
Because this peace that you have within yourself,
is not unnatural, it’s not mental, but it
just happens to you. “It’s alright, so
what”, if they have said, if they have done
anything wrong to us, why should we bother.
So many things are there, which I can tell
you, which have worked out automatically.
Now, in Turkey, they have told me that there
is some boy who is from England, and he went
and told the media something against Sahaja
Yoga, and it was all published, but in the
court he confessed that “whatever I said
was wrong”. Nobody, went and told him, nobody
threatened him, nothing happened. So, from
your point of view you must understand, that
you are not going to get into any mess of
taking revenge of any kind, because you belong
to the government of God, and this government
is extremely alert, very genuine, and also
extremely efficient. As far as you are concerned,
you are a citizen of that great Kingdom. So
what you have achieved is the citizenship
of this great Kingdom of God, where you should
feel absolutely secured. The man who is secure
is never afraid, never afraid.
So, you have also got rid of your fear. Man
is in the – I don’t know why he is afraid
of this and afraid of that, and worries about
this and worries about that. It is something
surprising how they worry about their health,
worry about their family, their children,
their house, I mean, all sorts of things.
But Sahaja Yogis don’t, they don’t, we
have no worry, it all works out. Why should
we worry? That instrument of worry is over,
is finished I think, it’s gone out of order.
And what you are now, in a state where you
just have no time to worry because you are
enjoying yourself. This fear I have seen in
people works so much that so many diseases
people get out of fear, so many diseases.
Especially most of these left-sided diseases
people get out of fear, what is there to fear?
It’s like you beat the Mother Earth saying
that there’s a snake, there is no snake,
but you may just feel that way and you may
go on with this fear. Anybody, any kind of
an idea about a phantom or some sort of a
big devil standing somewhere. It is all nonsense,
for you it doesn’t exist. Say in the darkness
you are walking, so you see forms and things,
and some people say I saw one on a tree, some
sort of a form. It doesn’t exist actually,
it doesn’t exist, but this fear in man makes
him think like that. He is afraid of this
and afraid of that, and then, as a result,
he loses his freedom, he becomes a slave.
Slave to so many people he is afraid of, that
such and such man will harm me, such and such
man will trouble me. And the whole concept
of fear has ruined our family lives.
For example, a wife is dominating, husband
is dominating, there’s nothing to fear,
nothing to fear. By fear only you play into
their hands. So, supposing the wife is dominating,
just make fun out of it, if you cannot make
the fun in the presence of say, your wife
or your husband, better make it outside, thinking,
“Oh!, look at that!” It is your special
quality now that you can really get rid of
your fear completely. What is there to be
afraid of wife or afraid of husband? What
can he do to you? At the most he’ll kill
you, so what, you are going to die in any
way.
So, the fear of death is another nonsense
people have. First time when I started my
work everywhere they asked me, “What about
death?” I said “but just now you are living,
why are you asking,”what about death?””
So many people ask me the question, “what
about our death”, why do you want to know
about it? I’ll tell you what about today,
just now. So this is another mad idea that
we should know about our death, what is going
to happen, and whatever happens. Once you
are dead you are finished, you don’t have
to do anything after that, so what’s the
use of knowing when you will die, what will
happen to you? Whatever has to happen will
happen. We never ask that “when I sleep
what will happen to me?”- do we? And this
is a permanent sleep and we worry so much
about it, that we should know what will happen
after death. One has to die at the time whenever
it has to die, because whatever is born has
to be dead. But you do know that you have
got eternal life. You can never die, death
is not this body disappearing. Death is where
you are absolutely without any control of
your soul’s life. Once you are a realised
soul you have all the control, all the powers
to take your soul wherever you feel like;
to be born if you like, if you don’t want,
you will not be born. To be born with the
people in the families, in the communities,
wherever you like. There are many great souls,
I know that, have taken birth daringly into
societies which are very much, I should say,
deteriorating and are in danger of getting
destroyed, because of stupidity they do. So
this happening, that we are afraid of death,
is absolutely absurd for Sahaja Yogis. What
is there to think, even about your death?
There is nothing like death for you because
you have got eternal life. It’s not that
you continue with the same body, you may go
on changing your dress, but you are living,
you are aware, and you know, even if this
body is not there, you will be there all the
time available for Sahaja Yoga, for anything
that is to be done in the name of reality.
So, you must know your position as eternal
being, what is your work, what is your idea,
what you have to do. So one has to get rid
of this idea of death because death doesn’t
exist for you. It’s finished. Moreover,
all such people who are afraid of their death
go on having insurances, this, that, all headaches,
you see. And ultimately, what happens? All
these worldly things you leave here and you
depart. There is, I don’t think anybody,
could carry even a little dust with that soul
which is departing. But in your case, when
you people are no more on this Earth, so-called,
then you don’t carry all these material
things because you have already given up.
You have no interest in them, you are not
materialistic. So, your spirit is free, and
when you die, what happens to you is a very
simple thing, that you feel very liberated,
absolutely, and then you feel your freedom,
completely, and you can decide what you want
to do. It is all under your own guidance,
your own desire, everything works out. You
don’t feel that you have come out of your
body, and this is what should tell you that
there should be no fear of death. But, on
the contrary, it should be welcomed, because
you will feel much more liberated, much more
at ease. You don’t have other problems that
you have to, in any case, carry on in this
world because of this body. Now see, “I
have to take some medicines, I have to take
vitamins”, you don’t have to take anything,
you don’t need anything. This body is finished
is a very good idea. It is so troublesome,
you see all the time, despite the fact you
may say that “I don’t care for this body
and all that”, but this body won’t leave
you. This is the most sticky thing we have,
is our body. So to forget about death should
be the easiest thing for you.
We have broken many walls, as you know very
well, that the conditionings that we had we
have finished that, it is very surprising.
I have seen people, when they get their realisation,
immediately after that they start seeing around
them. They’ll immediately tell you what
is wrong with their religion, then they’ll
tell you what’s wrong with their country,
what’s wrong with their culture. It’s
through them I have come to know so much.
I didn’t know that this was so, but they
themselves told us. Now, for example there’s
a Frenchman, take it. If a Frenchman gets
his realisation, I mean, you know everything
about French,. The things you could never
even imagine what sort of people they are,
they will tell you everything. Same with the
English, I’ve seen English, they may, they
laugh at themselves alright, but actually
when they become realised souls, you see,
they give you a complete picture of English
people, what sort of people are there, what
is wrong with them, how they are egoistical,
this, that. I was amazed, I mean I never knew
so many things, which I came to know through
Sahaja Yogis who got realisation. Because
they have seen all these things very thoroughly
and very closely, and they knew what was it.
Now when you become so clean, washed-up, your
mind completely cleaned out from all kinds
of conditionings, you see, you become like
a mirror, a beautiful mirror, and in that
mirror one can see a complete picture of the
society in which we live, the complete picture
of the government which rules you, everything
so clear cut. And it is absolute, it is not
biased. For example, you ask somebody then
he will say “what is your politics?” If
I say “My politics is…I have no politics”,
he will say “What! you have no politics,
how can you exist without politics?” “I
have no politics”. So they will go on asking
questions to you which are very much unknown
but for a realised soul it is just the other
way round. He not only sees, but also shows
and expresses very clearly. I have been amazed
at the way people have been really so reflective
of the society into which they live, and the
country which they represent. So the identification
is lost, complete identification is lost.
You don’t feel identified much, you just
see what’s wrong with that person.
Then another point is, you start seeing how
you can help, what you should do, how you
can work it out. And the importance of that
becomes your main thing in life. Everybody,
I see yesterday, the way you brought all these
flags and all that, behind that flag I could
see all of you wanted that peace should prevail
in those countries, they should get all the
joy and beauty of Sahaja Yoga. What a feeling
it is, it is not like yourself becoming Sahaja
Yogis and sitting in the corner, no, they
want to do it for that country about which
they are not identified, but without identification
they have that deep feeling that they have
to work out, correct it. It is a very different
type of personality you develop. Normally,
you see, if you say a word against somebody
that is in your country they do like this
“Oh, what are you talking about, what about
your country!” Immediately, they will never
accept. If you just try to say one word against
their country or their government, which might
be the most rotten government, but no, still
“what? We are all right!” That kind of
stupid identification which keeps you completely
glued to that society. Like some people will
say, “no, I have to go to the pub”, I
said “why, why do you have to go to the
pub?” “That’s our society, that’s
our culture. We have to go, we have to go
to the pub, get drunk and fall down, all of
us together. That’s the sort of thing we
are. We can’t help it, you see, this is
what it is”> You tell anybody, “why do
you do like this? What is the need to do?”
“Well, because I have to live in this society,
after all, after all I belong to this society,
and I just can’t do what I like”. But
when you get your realisation you can do what
you like. You can do what you like because
you only like that is righteous, that is good,
that is constructive, that is helpful. So
you can do whatever you like after realisation,
there is no restriction for you. All these
restrictions of “don’t, don’t, don’t
don’t”. These clearly enslave you, I think
it very much enslaves you, but after realisation
you are such a free bird that nothing can
enslave you.
For example, there are many preachers who
preach that you should not drink and you should
not smoke, you should not take drugs, you
should do this and do that, but it doesn’t
stop, it doesn’t help, people struggle,
try everything, ultimately they commit suicides.
But they cannot get rid of those habits, while
now you are so powerful that nothing can stick
to you. That is the purity of your character
that has come up. It doesn’t allow any nonsensical
things to stick to you.
I have heard of so many Sahaja Yogis telling
me how their eyes have steadied down, how
they have become so righteous, how they have
become so pure and they can’t understand.
They said “Mother, is it Your power, Your
purity, You have given us? Or it is our purity
You have awakened?” Of course yours, no
doubt, all these things you have and you become
aware of it and thus you get absolutely misidentified,
I should say, with all these nonsensical things,
and you don’t like it. You just don’t
like it, and you go on criticising. I have
been to all these countries also before and
I have met people who are very much identified,
and diplomatically I was not supposed to say
anything whatsoever that would make them feel
that they are doing something wrong. But after
Sahaja Yoga the same people are telling us
and making fun of the whole thing. For example,
I have heard some Sahaja Yogis talking to
each other. He says “you see in my country
this is such a stupid thing going on”. Another
one said, “nobody can beat mine, it is much
worse”. It is a very common competition
among Sahaja Yogis going on. So then, we have
to see how pure we have become, and in this
purity, anything that is dirty, murky, anything
that will spoil this purity, we don’t like
it. We don’t like it. We are washed clean
from inside, and we won’t want to take anything
like that within us anymore.
Then I have seen also the way people have
become so compassionate. It is very surprising
how they have become compassionate to each
other. For example, there were two Sahaja
Yogis who were not very happy with each other,
not compatible, whatever you say that is.
And I did not know ow to make them feel that,
you see, the other Sahaja Yogi is alright,
it doesn’t matter after all, what is it.
“No, I don’t like this thing about him”,
and the other would say “I don’t like
this thing about him”. So it went on “I
don’t like”, he says “I don’t like”,
I mean they were seeing each other’s defects
or whatever you may call them. So I said “alright,
now will you meditate for some time again,
meditate, meditate”. And I said “now..do
you love Me?”. One says “I love You more
that he loves”, I said “it is a difficult
situation, how to make them understand now
that you cannot weigh your love, you cannot
make a chart out of it, it is something within
yourself, and if you love somebody then you
enjoy it. I mean, you cannot qualify it, you
cannot quantify it”. But this was going
on with these two gentlemen together, and
I thought, now what to do? They are very important
and still there is no understanding between
the two. So the Divine power took over, I
think. One of them fell very sick suddenly,
very sick, and I had sent word also that “you’ll
be sick, be careful”, but they thought that
the other fellow might be trying to be funny
or something. It was not understood, he was
very sick. When he fell sick, the other one
felt such a tremendous love for him. It is
something nobody can explain. That he went
and sat with that patient for 24 hours and
said, “if you need any money, I have got”.
He paid wherever he could pay. So, this gentleman,
who was a very sensible, reasonable person
on his own, felt this love, this affection
in this hard task-master, the other one, and
such understanding grew up within them. It
is, I think, the Divine’s play that they
were brought together so close, and such compassion.
So the force of compassion within you is so
much, it is very subtle, you don’t see it,
because on a mental level I was telling them,
arguing, trying to pacify him, pacify him,
like that was on, it would not work out. But
when this force of compassion started acting,
suddenly into one of them, another one saw
the compassion, the pure compassion, and just
they became great friends.
So one has to feel the compassion within yourself.
I have seen many a time that there are many
Sahaja Yogis, and sometimes I have to correct
them or say something. Immediately another
one will say, “Mother, can You forgive him?
You can’t forgive?” I say, “I’ve forgiven,
I’m not saying anything”. “Please forgive,
please”, I feel so happy to hear that, that
in one point, in one condition, when it comes
to a Sahaja Yogi, you support him, even against
Me, I feel happy. Shows that you are not only
generous, but you are filled with your compassion.
So, this source of compassion which is within
your being, in your heart, you just have to
open your heart. If you open that heart it
is like opening the Sahastrara. You’ll be
amazed how you can forgive people and how
you can live with them. I have reports which
disturbs Me, many a time that people are forming
different groups and having different ashrams,
and they don’t come to the collective and
all that. I feel very much concerned. Now
what is missing is, of course there are also
some people who think that they must have
a separate, their own organisation, and why
should they be in the collective and all that.
So that it is definite that such a person
has not yet achieved that state of compassion.
In the state of compassion you like that somebody
tells you that don’t say anything to such
and such person, “I don’t want you to
say this”. It is very, very joy-giving to
Me.
Like, we had one couple who were quarrelling
throughout, they used to send Me letters after
letters, I was fed up, telephones after telephones,
both of them quarrelling. Quarrelling so much,
I did not know what to do with them. So, I
thought it is better that they divorce and
finish it off, and I told them separately,
that “You better divorce each other and
get out of it. But the complaints you have
are such that they cannot be solved”. She
said “How?”. I said, “you are saying
that my husband does not give me more time,
he is always out, and he doesn’t spend any
nice moments with me, we don’t go out, and
all these complaints are there”. And the
husband says that “she always troubles me
that I must take her out, and I must do this
and I must do that, I want to do it, but I
can’t do”. So, I said but when you take
a divorce you’ll never claim anything. Permanently
the husband is lost and you are lost, so why
do you want to do such a thing? Immediately
this compassion started working, and then
I put in a word. “Supposing any one of you
is sick tomorrow, then you will look after
each other?” This just put them out.
You know such little, little moments in life
come in the lives of Sahaja Yogis I’ve seen,
that suddenly this heart opens, and with that
they combat all this petty nonsensical ideas
which keep them out from each other and out
of the collectivity. What gives Me the greatest
enjoyment is to see how you love each other,
care for each other, joke with each other,
and dance with each other. This is the greatest
thing that I enjoy. I don’t want to get
rid of this idea of mine, despite the fact
many times it is hard to believe how Sahaja
Yogis could behave like this and try to create
rifts and distances between the people who
are realised souls. Because realised souls
anywhere in the world, if you see them, they
respect each other, and not only respect,
care and never talk ill of another realised
soul. Never, I don’t know if you have known
about the private lives of these saints, but
in India as we have had so many of them, when
you see them, how they have behaved towards
each other, the way they have looked after
each other, it is so beautiful, it is so noble,
as if they care for the other Sahaja Yogi,
or yogi, or realized soul, more than for themselves.
And the whole thing makes, you feel like in
a new world of new people who care for the
feelings of others, and not what they want
to say or what they want to have, or they
are something special.
Also, in Sahaja Yoga you have lost your specialities.
Some of them think they are very special.
Supposing I call some lady to put, say, some
altar on My Feet. She starts thinking she
is very special, but I just call her because
I know she has a horrible Agya and I have
to clear it out. And when somebody told Me,
“Mother, she thinks she is something very
special”, I said “really, what makes her
think like that?” “Because You call her
to put some altar on Your Feet”. I said,
“I just call her that she has such a horrid
ugly Agya, that she will trouble everyone,
so I want to clear it”. So, either I should
have told her that “you are a very egoistical,
horrible, and all the words that are possible,
“otherwise she won’t understand. It is
so surprising. There is one lady who was really
very nasty to her in-laws and everybody in
India, and she came to see Me. I actually
scolded her, I said “what business you had
to behave like this here? Your father, who
was such a racist – you never said a word
against him, now why are you talking so much
against these people?” – I scolded her!
And she went out and told – “Oh, look
at me – Mother has called me – nobody
is allowed to see Her” – I said, “What’s
this?” It’s a very funny situation with
people – I sometimes feel. The way they
think they are something special and they
should make themselves special, it is becoming
really difficult. Now, just to show my love,
to appreciate something, people have, gone
down !! – and if you give some present to
that person or you show concern about that
person because he’s done some good work
or something, he starts thinking he’s something
special. I mean, it is an impossible situation,
because I expect that if I have done anything
good to that person, or in anyway suggested
my concern about a person, that person has
to become a very good Sahaja Yogi, in the
sense – the most humble and honest and loving
person, otherwise it has no meaning. No use
being good to anyone if that means that person
jumps into hell. So, this one is also another
idea of speciality, that they have lost their
sense of speciality.
When a drop becomes the ocean, it has become
the ocean but it’s not the drop anymore.
If anybody thinks I’m a special person then
know that you are no more an ocean, you are
still the drop, because, unless and until
you are the drop, how can you feel that I’m
something special. So, you have lost your
speciality, you have lost it because all these
ideas of speciality comes from your past.
One lady I met once, a long time back, she
was a very rude, loud, arrogant woman. So,
this was in Delhi where people are very conscious
of their husband’s jobs and this and that.
I didn’t even know the destination or even
the designation of my husband. So, she was
very rude. I said, “What’s the matter
with you?, Why are you so rude?, What’s
the problem?”. She said, “You don’t
know? – I’m the wife of such and such”.
“You are the wife or the husband?”. “I
am the wife of such and such”!! So, she
asked me “What are you doing here?”, I
said “I am a housewife”. Then my husband
came, she said “Do you know him?” I said,
“Yes, I know him – why?” I thought there
must be something wrong there also. So she
said “No, I just want to know”, “ah
– How do you know him?” – Why? As if
I was some criminal or what!! I said “He’s
my husband”, “Oh, my God, he’s your
husband!!” What happened? – as if 10 serpents
had bitten her. Maybe her husband was at a
much lower position than my husband, maybe,
something which I am not conscious of it.
But this is what is “I am something special”.
This stupid idea of being special has to be
completely negated in Sahaja Yoga. Not mentally,
not mentally. Mentally if you are again saying
“I’m not special, I’m not special, like
a mantra, you’ll become much more – because
you will say “I’ve said this mantra 23,000
times – who can say like me. So this idea,
I’m something special, I’m something great,
I’m something out of the blue, something
superior to others, just vanishes. Like as
I said, you are a drop in the sea. You have
become the ocean but you are no more a drop
to have it a relative value system, there’s
no relative value system. There’s no system
by which you can say that I’m higher or
he’s lower – all that has created all
the problems of the world. See, from our cast
system in India, the social systems in the
west, the racialism in the west, also self-consciousness
of – my religion is better, yours is worst,
we are the best. All these things have created
problems. It has done no good, it has failed
and failed and failed. So, in Sahaja Yoga,
at least don’t bring this disease anymore
– that I’m better, our country’s better.
This speciality you should drop and the real
beauty of your personality reached. For that,
you don’t need a special skin, you don’t
need a special body, you don’t need a special
– what you can call – a glamorous look.
What you need is a beautiful heart ! And,
I tell you, it is the beautiful heart that
attracts – nothing else. It’s the beautiful
heart that you want to have.
I’ve known people, many like that. There
was one gentleman who divorced his first wife.
She may be, not be so good looking, ugly or
whatever it was. Then he married another good
looking woman and he ran away from the house.
So, I asked him “Why?” – you didn’t
like that woman because she was ugly or whatever
it was – Why have you now been running away
from this one?” “She has no heart – She
has no heart” . And – this is what you
have – a very great, generous, beautiful,
dharmic, heart – you have got it – as
a present from the Divine and which you must
respect. You should be proud of and enjoy
it – as you should enjoy your generosity,
you should enjoy the way all this nature is
enjoying itself. To be very meticulous about
things, to be all the time correcting others,
it is a headache – it’s a headache. The
best thing is to correct yourself and laugh
at yourself, that’s the best way you can
do it. Everybody has some funny things about
themselves. I also have, I must admit, and
I enjoy them because I think I try and try
but always I forget. For example, the spectacles
– I always forget them. Before coming – you
see, I must always forget it – I tell Myself
that I need it – I should take it – I
must remember – but invariably I forget.
I don’t know why – I mean, I can’t do
without it, but still I forget. There’s
so many things – for example, I don’t
know how to count money, if you may give me
a 100 rupees, I’ll count it 200 rupees.
I tell you, I’m good at mathematics but
I can’t count. I don’t know how to sign
a check, can you believe it, I can’t sign
it. You have to write the check for me, otherwise
I can’t. And, somebody asked me say, for
say 100 rupees – I’ll give him 500 – and
forget about it and that person will say “Mother,
you gave me 500 – and I’ll say “No,
no – I gave you 100 only – “No, you
gave me 500″. I went home and found out
– it’s alright – after all if he’s
dishonest, he’s dishonest, if he’s honest,
his honest, so why to worry about how much
money you gave and this thing and that? Meticulously,
you see, finding everything like this and
I’ve seen with all these meticulous people
they always fail – because you see this
brain plays some tricks on them.
For example, there was one fellow who told
me that the size of your car is such and such
– alright then – So, the size of the garage
should be such and such, I said, “alright”.
So, when he built the garage, the car won’t
get in. I said, such a meticulous architect
and such a well-known person who has got so
many awards, this, that – how could he make
such a mistake? I still didn’t understand
it – you see? He said, “Now, you better
buy a smaller car”. I said, “at least
now you made this garage in a proper way,
otherwise again if I buy something it won’t
enter in.
So, you see, what I’m saying, we are so
particular, so meticulous. Now, see these
little, little flowers, I see them here, they
are not meticulous, they are growing on their
own – freely – everybody gets the suns
rays and they are quite happy. But the way
we are particular – those people who are
very particular are headaches to themselves
and then ultimately they find that it is not
so. You have lost that – you have lost that
meticulousness.
I know of a Sahaja Yogini – she was running
a shop and she said, “Mother, I knew each
and everything, and I knew each and every
price and every thing I knew in the shop – but
since I’ve got realisation I’ve forgotten
everything. “So, are you happy or unhappy?”.
“I’m very happy”. “Why?” “Because,
now I’m making a big profit”. Profit is
the main thing – why should you try to remember
each and every thing.
So, it is to be very meticulous to be very
systematic, where you see around there – no
tree is systematic – it is unsystematically
systematic. Some leaves are this side, some
are that side, some branches are on that side
– there’s no system, because then you
become a military – if you form a system.
So, in Sahaja Yoga, there is no system. We
are beyond time, we are beyond all kinds of
systems, we have no systems. All our system
is what is the unison within ourselves. Like
these two hands, they have no system built
in, nothing, but they move, especially telling
you if you want. Both the hands move like
that, all the time like anything and I don’t
know what it means but they all do the same
thing. But, there’s no system built in – nobody
said to them that, do these gestures and all
that but they do it and they do it naturally,
all of them together – without any system.
So to build up mental systems is wrong and
against Sahaja Yoga. Some people have written
to me “Mother, we want to translate your
transcriptions – that, do this, do that,
and plans – I said, “forget it, forget
it”. Because, if you start planning, you
see, you will definitely, definitely fall
into the trap of systems. You’ll have to
follow systems – this system is good, that
system is good, why not have this way and
because, I don’t mean, I don’t say that
is wrong because you have been used to systems.
Especially in the West people are over systematic,
over systematic. In everything, like they’ll
have courses, you see, built up – then the
spoons, then the forks, then how to move and
what to eat and how to eat – I mean, it
is too much. If you have to eat food it is
straight forward – you can eat it with your
hands, there’s no system needed. For all
these systems, anorms – are too much in
the West and you should really try to cut
them down. As a result, they had anti-culture
and all that nonsense, another kind of stupidity
where they were building up another kind of
a system. You see, then they said – “We
are hippies now – alright – so they must
have hair never washed, never clean with lice
in their heads and it must be all – like,
you can say – the “shankara” style.
So, all of them have to have that – again
a system. There’s no variety, one hippie
means, another is the same – you cannot
make them out one from another. If somebody
puts a ring here, everybody will put it, if
he puts a ring here, then everybody will put
it. Without any brains, without any understanding
and they talk of individuality – a personality,
where is the individuality. Because you take
to anything that your gang – you can call
– or you can call the crowds – they are
taking to, very fashionable. In India, if
you say it is very fashionable, it means it
is very expensive and very beautiful and I
mean it’s a very elite, elite word. But
when it’s very fashionable, means everybody
likes it. It could be a punky thing or anything
– it’s fashionable – it’s the fashion.
Means you do not have your own idea – your
own personality, your own individuality. In
Sahaja Yoga you are not bound to any fashion,
no fashion. If you like, wear this, wear that
– whatever you like. You are free to do
what you like. You can wear whatever you like
but as I said – again that you will govern
yourself, you will be your own Guru, you will
be your own master and you will do whatever
is good, whatever is decent, whatever the
deities will like. You’ll just do it that
way because now you are a Sahaja Yogi.
So, the life becomes so much easier, so much
easier, you don’t worry about things which
are not there and you are not also worried
about the things which are there, because
you think, now, you see something, alright,
I have got this nice one now, I must keep
this one for somebody, I must give it to somebody.
So, I got a ring which was quite big. I was
thinking whom should I give this, who has
got thick fingers. So I started looking at
the fingers of everyone, you see, whosoever
has a thick finger, I ‘ll give him this
one. I mean the thought was just the other
way round, supposing you are not a Sahaja
Yogi, then you will say, “Oh Ma, such a
big thick finger – why don’t you take
out some gold and use it, sell it off – or
else you see you can take out the stone from
here. I mean all kinds of nonsensical things
you’ll think but you’ll not think that
you better give it to somebody because you
can’t wear it, it’s too big for you. Why
not give it to another? What’s wrong? After
all, it is not fitting you – so give it
to another – but this is only possible in
Sahaja Yoga. I’ve seen people, very kind,
very, very kind people who have been very
sweet to each other and exactly what the other
person wants they’ll buy and give it to
that person or may say, oh no, I have one
I’ll give it to you – they do it like
that, all the time thinking of others – What
should I give? – What should I do? It’s
the expression of that joy, the compassion
within you, you use your matter for that,
all the time, all the time.
Like somebody’s house was burgled in Canada.
So she writes to me – “Thank God, my house
is cleaned out now, I didn’t know what to
do with it, with the junk”.
So you see, this kind of an attitude comes
in, so that if you have to give to someone
then give it to someone who is a Sahaja Yogi
to express your love. But normally, people
will do, with whatever, is the junk in the
house, whatever is rotten, finished you see,
that they will give as a present. But when
you are a Sahaja Yogi, you want to give something
really very special because your whole being
has become so beautiful. Just like a flower,
I should say, which wants to give fragrance
to others all the time, the fragrance of your
compassion and love, affection and security.
It’s a new age, what they would say, but
I would say it’s a new human beings that
are before me and all this newness has so
many beautiful (assets?), that they really
sparkle like diamonds – no doubt. My only
blessings to you is that you grow and grow
in it and become greater and greater people.
Never thinking that you are greater than others.
Never thinking that you are more special than
others, this will definitely soothe you down
completely. Somebody might have hurt you somewhere,
doesn’t matter, somebody must have scolded
you – doesn’t matter. What is your capacity
is to love another person and to be affectionate
and kind.
I’m really amazed how these 25 years have
passed – with all kinds of stupid problems
and nice things – such a mixture and all
those things have never disturbed me – I
was never disturbed. I used to act sometimes,
that I’m angry or sometimes I used to say
things which I should not have, normally said
because it was needed to be said. But, on
the whole – like sitting in a very big ship
you can say – we all are elevated into the
realm of Divine Love and this is what one
has to achieve. One person, if he has that
love and compassion and that pure love then
that person can emit it to others and the
rapport of this compassion is extremely beautiful
which cannot be described in words. Like yesterday,
I couldn’t speak – with what words I could
put my feelings. I thought there are no words
that are created on this earth to express
my deep feeling that how you people have taken
to Sahaja Yoga so well and
have understood it.
May God bless you.